Fix accuracy calculation - compare routing decisions, not token predictions
Add real hardware metrics - power, temperature, memory usage
Run longer experiments - more epochs to see convergence
Compare with real MoE training - use actual expert networks



problem: all are going to one router. 
Technique	Effect	Code Example/Note
Load balancing loss	Penalizes uneven expert usage	std(tokens_per_expert)
Entropy regularization	Encourages uniform routing	-entropy(tokens_per_expert)
KL to uniform	Forces routing to be close to uniform	KL(router_probs || uniform)
Softmax temperature	Spreads out routing probabilities	softmax(logits / T)



1. What the Current MoE Model Does
Your current MoE model (e.g., MoETransformerBlock and OptimizedMoELayer in your codebase) is a custom transformer block that includes a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer. Here’s how it works:
Architecture and Flow
Input: Receives token embeddings (from tokenized text).
LayerNorm: Applies layer normalization.
MoE Layer:
Router: Decides, for each token, which experts (small MLPs) should process it. The router can be a baseline (capacity-based) or your energy-aware TTT router.
Experts: Each expert is a small feedforward network (e.g., SwiGLU MLP).
Dispatch: Tokens are routed to one or more experts (top-k), processed, and their outputs are combined.
Dropout/Residual: Applies dropout and adds a residual connection.
Output: Returns the processed tensor and routing/auxiliary metrics.
Key Features
Router Swapping: You can swap in different routers (baseline, energy-aware, etc.) for research.
TTT Integration: The energy-aware router can update its routing policy at test time, using hardware feedback (power, temp, etc.).
Metrics: Tracks and logs routing diversity, power, temperature, and other metrics.
Limitation
This model is not a full LLM like GPT-2; it’s a research block for MoE/routing/TTT experiments.
2. How to Add MoE and Routing to DistilGPT2 (or GPT-2) and Integrate TTT
Here’s a step-by-step outline and code sketch for what you want:
A. Outline: Adding MoE to DistilGPT2
Subclass the HuggingFace DistilGPT2 model.
Replace the feedforward (FFN/MLP) block in one or more transformer layers with your MoE block.
Ensure your MoE block supports router swapping and TTT.
Integrate your hardware-aware TTT router and feedback logic.
Train or run inference as usual, but now with MoE and hardware-aware routing.
B. Code Sketch: MoE Integration with DistilGPT2
Step 1: Define Your MoE Block
Suppose you have a class like this (simplified):
Apply to run_energy_a...
.
Step 2: Subclass DistilGPT2 and Replace FFN with MoE
Apply to run_energy_a...
)
Step 3: Integrate TTT and Hardware Feedback
In your MyMoEBlock, ensure the router supports TTT and hardware feedback (as in your current energy-aware router).
During inference, collect hardware stats and pass them to the router for adaptation.
Step 4: Use the Model
Apply to run_energy_a...
)
C. TTT Integration
Your router (inside MyMoEBlock) should expose methods for TTT updates, just as in your current code.
During inference, after each batch, call the TTT update logic with hardware feedback.
D. What You Need to Implement
A MyMoEBlock that matches the interface of the original FFN block (input/output shapes).
A router that can be swapped and supports TTT/hardware feedback.
A subclass of DistilGPT2Model (or GPT2Model) that replaces the FFN with your MoE block.
(Optional) Utilities to log and plot metrics as in your current experiments.
Summary Table
Step	What to Do
1. MoE Block	Implement a block with experts and a router (TTT/hardware-aware capable).
2. Model Surgery	Subclass DistilGPT2, replace FFN with your MoE block in each transformer layer.
3. TTT Integration	Ensure router supports TTT and hardware feedback, call update logic.
4. Usage	Tokenize as usual, run model, collect/log metrics, perform TTT updates.


07.03.2025
11:30 am 
Loss is the standard cross-entropy between your model’s logits and the input tokens. It reflects how well the MoE model is reconstructing the text (since you’re doing language-modeling where input = target).
RoutingDiversity is the fraction of experts actually used in that batch (e.g. 0.5 means half your experts fired at least once).
EstimatedPower is coming straight from your cost model’s get_cost("moe_router", batch_size=seq_len) call, i.e. the joules predicted per token for the routing operation.
What to do next for real energy savings
Right now, the energy-aware run just logs the joules, but doesn’t act on them. To actually reduce power you must:

Wire the estimate into your router’s objective.
In your EnergyAwareTTTRouter.ttt_update(feedback) (or inside its forward), use something like:
# pseudo-code inside the router
score_per_expert = base_score  - λ * feedback['estimated_energy']
choose top-k experts by this penalized score
A small λ (e.g. 0.001) gently nudges the router away from expensive expert calls. Larger λ makes it more “stingy.”
Tune λ on a validation set.
Start λ≈0.001 and increase until you see routing diversity drop.
Watch that your loss curve doesn’t balloon.
Compare real vs. estimated power.
Overlay GpuSystemMonitor.history’s actual watts with your model’s EstimatedPower.
If they track closely, your cost model is well-calibrated.
Optionally use richer cost signals.
Call get_cost_breakdown(...) to see memory vs. compute vs. thermal components.
Or adapt batch size via get_thermal_safe_batch_size(...) when the GPU is hot.